---
title: "Creating an AI Pentest Agent - Part 1"
date: 2026-02-01 00:00:00 +0000
categories: [AI/ML]
tags: [AI/ML]
---
# Introduction
So with everyone creating their own AI agents/Wrappers and all i have also decided to do this as a side project just for my research purposes, mind you i have zero to no experience with creating an AI agent. I mean i have created models in UNI for assignments but then i have no clue what I'm doing so walk with me on learning whatever this is and how far i go.

So I also decided to go with a cool name for this "SentryX" this is all i could think up of anyways, lets continue our learning journey.

# What is AI
According to IBM AI is:
>"Artificial intelligence (AI) is technology that enables computers and machines to simulate human learning, comprehension, problem solving, decision making, creativity and autonomy."

In my words AI is:
>The art of making a computer perform tasks that **normally** require ***Human Intelligence***. 

Some basic examples in relation to Cybersecurity are:
-  Recognizing spam emails
- Recommending YouTube videos
- Detecting fraud
- Classifying vulnerabilities

AI is not magic, its just pattern recognition, not even thinking tbh.

# What is Machine Learning
Machine Learning is a subset of AI. This would allow us to avoid writing rules like:
```
if response_contains_error and length_changes:
    vuln = "SQLi"
```

We can show examples of requests and responses to make the model learn patterns. in simple words:

> ML = Learning patterns from data to make predictions on new data.

## Types of Machine Learning
### 1. Supervised Learning (What we will be using the most)

In this i will be giving an input as features and a set of outputs labeled correctly. 
```
features -> SQLi
features -> No vuln
```

This type of learning is usually used for vulnerability classification, malware detection or spam filtering.

### 2. Unsupervised Learning
In this there will be simply no labels the model itself will find the structure on its own, this will mostly be used in things like. Clustering Traffic or Anomaly Detection.

### 3. Reinforcement Learning
In this the agent will be learning by trial and error this is mostly used for Game AI, Robotics or Complex Automations.

# How ML Really Works 
There is a general flow of how things work. ill break down the steps in the ways i understand and how i think you guys would understand. So let me explain the ML Pipeline 

```
Data -> Features -> Model -> Prediction -> Evaluation
```

Let me break this down step by step.
1. Data
	- Data is raw observations, for example. 
		- HTTP Response Lengths
		- Status Codes
		- Error Presence
	- Raw Data is useless unless it has been processed.
	
2. Features
	- This is a critical part of the pipeline for us, Features are the numbers the model can understand. because ML cant understand Text or Logic.
	- So instead of:
		- Error Message Detected
	- You use:
		- error_detected = 1
	- Examples
		```
		features = [
	    response_length,
	    status_code,
	    error_detected,
	    structure_change
		]
		```
	Good ML = Good Features
	
3. Model
	-  This is a mathematical function that maps the features with the output
		-  Features -> Output
	- Example:
		- [200, 1, 1, 0] -> SQLi
		
4. Prediction
	- This is the stage where the model makes a guess on the unseen data.
	
5. Evaluation
	- In this we measure the 
		- Accuracy 
		- Precision
		- Recall
	- If the above is bad the data or features should be fixed.

So this is like the basic theory part of AI/ML, so with this understanding we'll move forward to actual practical parts of creating models and training them to better understand the process of how and AI agent can work.